source/part1/chapter-02/md/05-modules.md, before:

---
jupyter:
  jupytext:
    text_representation:
      extension: .md
      format_name: markdown
      format_version: '1.3'
      jupytext_version: 1.11.5
  kernelspec:
    display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
    language: python
    name: python3
---

# Loading and using modules

In this section we provide some additional background on loading and using *{term}`modules <module>`* in Python. Modules are not much different from the Python script files produced in the previous section, but there are many Python modules that are freely available and this is one of the best things about using Python. You can find modules to do *many* common programming tasks in Python!


## Modules, packages and libraries?

A Python *{term}`module`* [^module] refers to a piece of Python code that is designed to execute a specific task. Technically, modules are simply Python script files (with the file extension `.py`) that contain function definitions and other statements. [Python packages](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html#packages) [^package] are a way of organizing modules into larger entities. 

Modules and packages are similar to what are more generally called libraries in programming languages, which again contain code related to specific tasks such as mathematical operations. There are a *HUGE* number of Python modules/packages, and many of them greatly extend what can be done in a normal Python program. In fact, the abundance of free Python modules is one of the best reasons to learn and start using Python.

The words "module", "package" and "*{term}`library`*" are often used interchangeably.


## Loading modules

Python modules can be loaded in a number of different ways.

Let's start simple with the math module. Here, we can load the math module using the `import` statement and then we are able to explore some of the functions in the module, such as the square root function `sqrt`.

```python
import math
```

```python
math.sqrt(81)
```

Here we have loaded the math module by typing `import math`, which tells Python to read in the functions in the math module and make them available for use. In this example, we see that we can use a function within the math library by typing the name of the module first, a period, and then the name of function we would like to use afterward (e.g., `math.sqrt()`).


### Built-in functions

[Built-in functions](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html) [^builtin] such as `print()` are always available without importing anything.

```python
print("Hello world!")
```

Technically, the built-in functions belong to a module called `builtins`.


### Renaming imported modules

We can also rename modules when they are imported, which can be helpful when using modules with longer names. Let's import the `math` module, but rename it to `m` using the format `import module as name`. Then we can using the `sqrt` function from the math library and check the type of our module named `m`.

```python
import math as m
```

```python
m.sqrt(49)
```

```python
type(m)
```

Here, we imported the `math` module with the name `m` instead of `math`. We will see other examples later in the course where using an alternate name is rather useful. For example, in the next chapter we will start using the `pandas` library for data analysis. It is customary to import pandas as `pd`.

```python
import pandas as pd
```

### Importing a single function

It is also possible to import only a single function from a module, rather than the entire module. This is sometimes useful when needing only a small piece of a large module. We can do this using the form `from module import function`. Let's import the `sqrt` function from the `math` module using this approach. Again, we can test using our results by using the function afterwards.

```python
from math import sqrt
```

```python
sqrt(121)
```

Though this can be useful, it has the drawback that **the imported function could conflict with other built-in or imported function names**, and you lose the information about which module contains the imported function. You should only do this when you truly need to.


### Importing a submodule

Some modules have submodules that can also be imported without importing the entire module. We may see examples of this later when making data plots using the pyplot sub-module from the [Matplotlib module](http://matplotlib.org/) [^matplotlib]. In case you're curious, here is an example.

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
```

```python
# Plot a simple x y line graph with the default settings
plt.plot([1, 2, 3, 4, 5], [5, 2, 3, 4, 1])
```

_**Figure 2.9**. Example plot using the Matplotlib module._

You can read more about the `plot` plotting function in the [matplotlib pyplot documentation](https://matplotlib.org/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.plot.html) [^matplotdocs]. We will introduce matplotlib in detail in Chapter 3.

<!-- #region -->
## Using module functions

As we see above, the easiest way to use a module is to import it an then use its functions by typing `modulename.functionname()` and providing the necessary arguments. Yes, it is that simple.

However, there are times that you may not know the names of all of the functions in a given module, or which are part of a module. You can view the list of functions that are part of a module by using the `dir()` function.

```python
In [1]: dir(math)
```

```
['__doc__',
 '__file__',
 '__loader__',
 '__name__',
 '__package__',
 '__spec__',
 'acos',
 'acosh',
... (output truncated)
```
<!-- #endregion -->

In Jupyter notebooks you can also browse the available modules by typing in `modulename.` and then pressing the tab key:

![_**Figure 2.10**. Listing functions in the math module in JupyterLab._](../img/view_module_functions.png)

_**Figure 2.10**. Listing functions in the math module in JupyterLab._

So that's helpful, but what about when you don't know what a given function does? The easiest solution is to use the `help()` function (after importing the module). Let's have a look at the help for the `math.sin` function.

```python
help(math.sin)
```

## What should I not do?

Modules are very useful in Python, but there are a few things to avoid.


### from X import *

Don't use `from X import *`. This may be easier to understand by way of an example, but assuming `X` above is a Python module, `from X import *` will import all of the functions in module X. Though you might think this is helpful, it is much better to simply `import X` or `import X as Y` to keep the connection between the functions and their module. It is also much more likely you will encounter conflicting names when using `from X import *`.


### Poor names when renaming on import

Don't use confusing names when renaming on import. Be smart when you import modules, and follow generally used conventions (`import pandas as pd` is a good way to do things!). If you want to make the module name shorter on import, pick a reasonable abbreviation. For instance, `import matplotlib as m` could be confusing, especially if we used `import math as m` above, and might do so in other Jupyter notebooks or script files. Similarly, `import matplotlib as math` is perfectly OK syntax in Python, but bound to cause trouble. Remember, people need to be able to read and understand the code you write. Keep it simple and logical.


According to the good coding practices described in [PEP 8](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/#imports) [^pep8], we should always import modules at the top of the file. In this lesson, we are demonstrating how to import different modules along the way, but in general it would be better to import requried modules as the very first thing. PEP 8 refers more to traditional script files, but we can apply the guideline to Jupyter Notebook files by placing our imports the first code cell in the notebook.


## Installing packages

If you have installed Python on your own computer, we recommend using the [Conda package management system](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/) [^conda] that comes with the Anaconda and Miniconda Python installers. Using Conda, you can list package names and versions using the `conda list` command in a terminal.
    
It's also good to be aware of [pip, the package installer for python](https://pypi.org/project/pip/)  [^pip]. Pip and conda are often used for similar purposes, but the key difference is that pip is used for installing packages written in Python, while conda handles packages that might also contain code written in other languages. Generally, we encourage you to use conda when installing packages (and within conda, it is preferable to use the same channel for installations). However, sometimes you might need a package that is not available via conda, but can be installed with pip. You can read more about differences and similarities of conda an pip at <https://www.anaconda.com/understanding-conda-and-pip/>.

<!-- #region -->
In a Jupyter Notebook, you can type in `help("modules")` to see the complete list of installed packages in Python. However, the output is a bit clumsy and hard to read. Note that when running this command, you might first get several warnings related to deprecated packages, etc.

```python
In [1]: help("modules")
```

```
Please wait a moment while I gather a list of all available modules...

/Users/whipp/opt/miniconda3/envs/python-gis-book/lib/python3.9/site-packages/
IPython/kernel/__init__.py:12: ShimWarning: The `IPython.kernel` package has been
deprecated since IPython 4.0.You should import from ipykernel or jupyter_client
instead.
  warn("The `IPython.kernel` package has been deprecated since IPython 4.0."

Cython              click_completion    linkify_it          scipy
IPython             click_log           llvmlite            seaborn
OpenSSL             click_plugins       locale              secrets
... (output truncated)
```
<!-- #endregion -->

## Footnotes

[^builtin]: <https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html>
[^conda]: <https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/>
[^matplotdocs]: <https://matplotlib.org/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.plot.html>
[^matplotlib]: <http://matplotlib.org/>
[^module]: <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html#modules>
[^package]: <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html#packages>
[^pep8]: <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/#imports>
[^pip]: <https://pypi.org/project/pip/>

Commit message:

Remove instructions for installing packages, reorganize

source/part1/chapter-02/md/05-modules.md, after:

---
jupyter:
  jupytext:
    text_representation:
      extension: .md
      format_name: markdown
      format_version: '1.3'
      jupytext_version: 1.11.5
  kernelspec:
    display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
    language: python
    name: python3
---

# Loading and using modules

In this section we provide some additional background on loading and using *{term}`modules <module>`* in Python. Modules are not much different from the Python script files produced in the previous section, but there are many Python modules that are freely available and this is one of the best things about using Python. You can find modules to do *many* common programming tasks in Python!


## Modules, packages and libraries?

A Python *{term}`module`* [^module] refers to a piece of Python code that is designed to execute a specific task. Technically, modules are simply Python script files (with the file extension `.py`) that contain function definitions and other statements. [Python packages](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html#packages) [^package] are a way of organizing modules into larger entities. 

Modules and packages are similar to what are more generally called libraries in programming languages, which again contain code related to specific tasks such as mathematical operations. There are a *HUGE* number of Python modules/packages, and many of them greatly extend what can be done in a normal Python program. In fact, the abundance of free Python modules is one of the best reasons to learn and start using Python.

The words "module", "package" and "*{term}`library`*" are often used interchangeably.


## Loading modules

Python modules can be loaded in a number of different ways.

Let's start simple with the math module. Here, we can load the math module using the `import` statement and then we are able to explore some of the functions in the module, such as the square root function `sqrt`.

```python
import math
```

```python
math.sqrt(81)
```

Here we have loaded the math module by typing `import math`, which tells Python to read in the functions in the math module and make them available for use. In this example, we see that we can use a function within the math library by typing the name of the module first, a period, and then the name of function we would like to use afterward (e.g., `math.sqrt()`).


### Built-in functions

[Built-in functions](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html) [^builtin] such as `print()` are always available without importing anything.

```python
print("Hello world!")
```

Technically, the built-in functions belong to a module called `builtins`.


### Renaming imported modules

We can also rename modules when they are imported, which can be helpful when using modules with longer names. Let's import the `math` module, but rename it to `m` using the format `import module as name`. Then we can using the `sqrt` function from the math library and check the type of our module named `m`.

```python
import math as m
```

```python
m.sqrt(49)
```

```python
type(m)
```

Here, we imported the `math` module with the name `m` instead of `math`. We will see other examples later in the course where using an alternate name is rather useful. For example, in the next chapter we will start using the `pandas` library for data analysis. It is customary to import pandas as `pd`.

```python
import pandas as pd
```

### Importing a single function

It is also possible to import only a single function from a module, rather than the entire module. This is sometimes useful when needing only a small piece of a large module. We can do this using the form `from module import function`. Let's import the `sqrt` function from the `math` module using this approach. Again, we can test using our results by using the function afterwards.

```python
from math import sqrt
```

```python
sqrt(121)
```

Though this can be useful, it has the drawback that **the imported function could conflict with other built-in or imported function names**, and you lose the information about which module contains the imported function. You should only do this when you truly need to.


### Importing a submodule

Some modules have submodules that can also be imported without importing the entire module. We may see examples of this later when making data plots using the pyplot sub-module from the [Matplotlib module](http://matplotlib.org/) [^matplotlib]. In case you're curious, here is an example.

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
```

```python
# Plot a simple x y line graph with the default settings
plt.plot([1, 2, 3, 4, 5], [5, 2, 3, 4, 1])
```

_**Figure 2.9**. Example plot using the Matplotlib module._

You can read more about the `plot` plotting function in the [matplotlib pyplot documentation](https://matplotlib.org/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.plot.html) [^matplotdocs]. We will introduce matplotlib in detail in Chapter 3.

<!-- #region -->
## Checking available functions and modules

As we saw above, the easiest way to use a module is to import it an then use its functions by typing `modulename.functionname()` and providing the necessary arguments. Yes, it is that simple.

However, there are times that you may not know the names of all of the functions in a module, or which are part of a given module. You can view the list of functions that are part of a module using the `dir()` function.

```python
In [1]: dir(math)
```

```
['__doc__',
 '__file__',
 '__loader__',
 '__name__',
 '__package__',
 '__spec__',
 'acos',
 'acosh',
... (output truncated)
```
<!-- #endregion -->

In Jupyter notebooks you can also browse the available modules by typing in `modulename.` and then pressing the tab key:

![_**Figure 2.10**. Listing functions in the math module in JupyterLab._](../img/view_module_functions.png)

_**Figure 2.10**. Listing functions in the math module in JupyterLab._

So that's helpful, but what about when you don't know what a given function does? The easiest solution is to use the `help()` function (after importing the module). Let's have a look at the help for the `math.sin()` function. Note that we do not include the parentheses for the target function when using the `help()` function.

```python
help(math.sin)
```

<!-- #region -->
Another possible issue is that you may not know which modules are available for use in your Jupyter Notebook. In this case you can type `help("modules")` to see the complete list of installed Python packages. Be aware that although this works, the output can be a bit clumsy and hard to read. In addition, note that when running this command you may first see several warnings related to deprecated packages, etc.

```python
In [1]: help("modules")
```

```
Please wait a moment while I gather a list of all available modules...

/Users/whipp/opt/miniconda3/envs/python-gis-book/lib/python3.9/site-packages/
IPython/kernel/__init__.py:12: ShimWarning: The `IPython.kernel` package has been
deprecated since IPython 4.0.You should import from ipykernel or jupyter_client
instead.
  warn("The `IPython.kernel` package has been deprecated since IPython 4.0."

Cython              click_completion    linkify_it          scipy
IPython             click_log           llvmlite            seaborn
OpenSSL             click_plugins       locale              secrets
... (output truncated)
```
<!-- #endregion -->

## What should I not do?

Modules are very useful in Python, but there are a few things to avoid.


### from X import *

Don't use `from X import *`. This may be easier to understand by way of an example, but assuming `X` above is a Python module, `from X import *` will import all of the functions in module X. Though you might think this is helpful, it is much better to simply `import X` or `import X as Y` to keep the connection between the functions and their module. It is also much more likely you will encounter conflicting names when using `from X import *`.


### Poor names when renaming on import

Don't use confusing names when renaming on import. Be smart when you import modules, and follow generally used conventions (`import pandas as pd` is a good way to do things!). If you want to make the module name shorter on import, pick a reasonable abbreviation. For instance, `import matplotlib as m` could be confusing, especially if we used `import math as m` above, and might do so in other Jupyter notebooks or script files. Similarly, `import matplotlib as math` is perfectly OK syntax in Python, but bound to cause trouble. Remember, people need to be able to read and understand the code you write. Keep it simple and logical.


According to the good coding practices described in [PEP 8](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/#imports) [^pep8], we should always import modules at the top of the file. In this lesson, we are demonstrating how to import different modules along the way, but in general it would be better to import requried modules as the very first thing. PEP 8 refers more to traditional script files, but we can apply the guideline to Jupyter Notebook files by placing our imports the first code cell in the notebook.


## Footnotes

[^builtin]: <https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html>
[^conda]: <https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/>
[^matplotdocs]: <https://matplotlib.org/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.plot.html>
[^matplotlib]: <http://matplotlib.org/>
[^module]: <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html#modules>
[^package]: <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html#packages>
[^pep8]: <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/#imports>
[^pip]: <https://pypi.org/project/pip/>
