source/part1/chapter-02/md/07-modules.md, before:

---
jupyter:
  jupytext:
    text_representation:
      extension: .md
      format_name: markdown
      format_version: '1.3'
      jupytext_version: 1.16.4
  kernelspec:
    display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
    language: python
    name: python3
---

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
# Loading and using modules

In this section we provide some additional background on loading and using *{term}`modules <module>`* in Python. Modules are actually not much different from the Python script files produced in the previous section, and there are many Python modules that are freely available. This is one of the best things about using Python; you can find modules to do *many* common programming tasks in Python!
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
## Modules, packages and libraries?

A Python *{term}`module`* [^module] refers to a piece of Python code that is designed to execute a specific task. Technically, modules are simply Python script files (with the file extension `.py`) that contain function definitions and other statements. [Python packages](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html#packages) [^package] are a way of organizing modules into larger entities. 

Modules and packages are similar to what are more generally called libraries in programming languages, which again contain code related to specific tasks such as mathematical operations. There are a huge number of Python modules/packages, and many of them greatly extend what can be done in a normal Python program. In fact, the abundance of free Python modules is one of the best reasons to learn and start using Python.

The words "module", "package" and "*{term}`library`*" are often used interchangeably.
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
## Loading modules

Python modules can be loaded in a number of different ways.

Let's start simple with the math module. Here, we can load the math module using the `import` statement and then we are able to explore some of the functions in the module, such as the square root function `sqrt`.
<!-- #endregion -->

```python
import math
```

```python
math.sqrt(81)
```

Here we have loaded the math module by typing `import math`, which tells Python to read in the functions in the math module and make them available for use. In this example, we see that we can use a function within the math library by typing the name of the module first, a period, and then the name of function we would like to use afterward (e.g., `math.sqrt()`).


### Built-in functions

[Built-in functions](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html) [^builtin] such as `print()` are always available without importing anything.

```python
print("Hello world!")
```

Technically, the built-in functions belong to a module called `builtins`.


### Renaming imported modules

We can also rename modules when they are imported, which can be helpful when using modules with longer names. Let's import the `math` module, but rename it to `m` using the format `import module as name`. Then we can using the `sqrt` function from the math library and check the type of our module named `m`.

```python
import math as m
```

```python
m.sqrt(49)
```

```python
type(m)
```

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
Here, we imported the `math` module with the name `m` instead of `math`. We will see other examples later in the first part of this book where using an alternate name is rather useful. For example, in the next chapter we will start using the `pandas` library for data analysis. It is customary to import pandas as `pd`.
<!-- #endregion -->

```python editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""}
import pandas as pd
```

### Importing a single function

It is also possible to import only a single function from a module, rather than the entire module. This is sometimes useful when needing only a small piece of a large module. We can do this using the form `from module import function`. Let's import the `sqrt` function from the `math` module using this approach. Again, we can test using our results by using the function afterwards.

```python
from math import sqrt
```

```python
sqrt(121)
```

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
Though this can be useful, it has two major drawbacks: (1) the imported function could conflict with other built-in or imported function names, and (2) you lose the information about which module contains the imported function. Thus, you should only do this when you truly need to.
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
### Importing a submodule

Some modules have submodules that can also be imported without importing the entire module. We will see examples of this in later chapters in this book when making data plots using the `pyplot` submodule from the [Matplotlib module](http://matplotlib.org/) [^matplotlib]. In case you're already curious, here is an example.
<!-- #endregion -->

```python editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""}
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
```

```python editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""}
# Plot a simple x y line graph with the default plot settings
plt.plot([1, 2, 3, 4, 5], [5, 2, 3, 4, 1])
```

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
_**Figure 2.9**. Example plot using the Matplotlib module._

You can read more about the `plot` plotting function in the [Matplotlib pyplot documentation](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.plot.html) [^matplotdocs]. We will introduce Matplotlib in more detail in Chapter 4.
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
## Checking available functions and modules

As we saw above, the easiest way to use a module is to import it an then use its functions by typing `modulename.functionname()` and providing the necessary arguments. Yes, it is that simple.

However, there are times that you may not know the names of all of the functions in a module, or which are part of a given module. You can view the list of functions that are part of a module using the `dir()` function.

```python
In [1]: dir(math)
```

```
['__doc__',
 '__file__',
 '__loader__',
 '__name__',
 '__package__',
 '__spec__',
 'acos',
 'acosh',
... (output truncated)
```
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
In Jupyter notebooks you can also browse the available modules by typing in `modulename.` and then pressing the **tab** key:

![_**Figure 2.10**. Listing functions in the math module in JupyterLab._](../img/view_module_functions.png)

_**Figure 2.10**. Listing functions in the math module in JupyterLab._

This may be quite helpful, but what about when you don't know what a given function does? The easiest solution is to use the `help()` function (after importing the module). Let's have a look at the `help()` function output for the `math.sin()` function. Note that we do not include the parentheses for the target function when using the `help()` function.
<!-- #endregion -->

```python editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""}
help(math.sin)
```

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
Another possible issue is that you may not know which modules are available for use in your Python environment. In this case you can type `help("modules")` to see the complete list of installed Python packages. Be aware that although this works, the output can be a bit clumsy and hard to read. In addition, note that you may first see several warnings related to deprecated packages, etc. when running this command.

```python
In [13]: help("modules")
```

```code
Please wait a moment while I gather a list of all available modules...

(Some warning messages may appear here)

Cython              click               lib2to3             rioxarray
IPython             click_completion    libmambapy          rlcompleter
OpenSSL             click_log           libpysal            rtree
PIL                 click_plugins       linecache           runpy
__future__          cligj               linkify_it          rvlib
... (output truncated)
```
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
## Best practices for using modules

Here are a few tips for using modules in your Python programs.
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
### Import modules at the start of your files

According to the good coding practices described in [PEP 8](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/#imports) [^pep8], we should always import modules at the top of a file. In this section, we have demonstrated how to import different modules along the way, but in general it is better to import required modules as the very first thing. PEP 8 refers more to traditional script files, but we can apply the guideline to Jupyter Notebook files as well by placing `import` statements in the first code cell of the notebook.

### Avoid importing functions using wildcards

It is best not to import many functions from a module using the form `from X import *`, where `X` is a Python module. `from X import *` will import all of the functions in module X, and though you might think this is helpful, it is much better to simply `import X` or `import X as Y` to maintain the connection between the functions and their module. In addition to losing the connection between the module and the function, it is much more likely you will encounter conflicting function names when using `from X import *`.

### Choose logical names when renaming on import

Do not use confusing names when renaming on import. Be smart when you import modules, and follow generally used conventions (`import pandas as pd` is a good way to do things!). If you want to make the module name shorter on import, pick a reasonable abbreviation. For instance, `import matplotlib as m` could be confusing, especially if we used `import math as m` above and might do so in other Jupyter notebooks or script files. Similarly, `import matplotlib as math` is perfectly OK syntax in Python, but bound to cause trouble. Remember, people need to be able to read and understand the code you write. Keep it simple and logical.
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
## Footnotes

[^builtin]: <https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html>
[^matplotdocs]: <https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.plot.html>
[^matplotlib]: <http://matplotlib.org/>
[^module]: <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html#modules>
[^package]: <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html#packages>
[^pep8]: <https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/#imports>
<!-- #endregion -->

Commit message:

Shorten best practices, add Appendix link

source/part1/chapter-02/md/07-modules.md, after:

---
jupyter:
  jupytext:
    text_representation:
      extension: .md
      format_name: markdown
      format_version: '1.3'
      jupytext_version: 1.16.4
  kernelspec:
    display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
    language: python
    name: python3
---

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
# Loading and using modules

In this section we provide some additional background on loading and using *{term}`modules <module>`* in Python. Modules are actually not much different from the Python script files produced in the previous section, and there are many Python modules that are freely available. This is one of the best things about using Python; you can find modules to do *many* common programming tasks in Python!
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
## Modules, packages and libraries?

A Python *{term}`module`* [^module] refers to a piece of Python code that is designed to execute a specific task. Technically, modules are simply Python script files (with the file extension `.py`) that contain function definitions and other statements. [Python packages](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html#packages) [^package] are a way of organizing modules into larger entities. 

Modules and packages are similar to what are more generally called libraries in programming languages, which again contain code related to specific tasks such as mathematical operations. There are a huge number of Python modules/packages, and many of them greatly extend what can be done in a normal Python program. In fact, the abundance of free Python modules is one of the best reasons to learn and start using Python.

The words "module", "package" and "*{term}`library`*" are often used interchangeably.
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
## Loading modules

Python modules can be loaded in a number of different ways.

Let's start simple with the math module. Here, we can load the math module using the `import` statement and then we are able to explore some of the functions in the module, such as the square root function `sqrt`.
<!-- #endregion -->

```python
import math
```

```python
math.sqrt(81)
```

Here we have loaded the math module by typing `import math`, which tells Python to read in the functions in the math module and make them available for use. In this example, we see that we can use a function within the math library by typing the name of the module first, a period, and then the name of function we would like to use afterward (e.g., `math.sqrt()`).


### Built-in functions

[Built-in functions](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html) [^builtin] such as `print()` are always available without importing anything.

```python
print("Hello world!")
```

Technically, the built-in functions belong to a module called `builtins`.


### Renaming imported modules

We can also rename modules when they are imported, which can be helpful when using modules with longer names. Let's import the `math` module, but rename it to `m` using the format `import module as name`. Then we can using the `sqrt` function from the math library and check the type of our module named `m`.

```python
import math as m
```

```python
m.sqrt(49)
```

```python
type(m)
```

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
Here, we imported the `math` module with the name `m` instead of `math`. We will see other examples later in the first part of this book where using an alternate name is rather useful. For example, in the next chapter we will start using the `pandas` library for data analysis. It is customary to import pandas as `pd`.
<!-- #endregion -->

```python editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""}
import pandas as pd
```

### Importing a single function

It is also possible to import only a single function from a module, rather than the entire module. This is sometimes useful when needing only a small piece of a large module. We can do this using the form `from module import function`. Let's import the `sqrt` function from the `math` module using this approach. Again, we can test using our results by using the function afterwards.

```python
from math import sqrt
```

```python
sqrt(121)
```

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
Though this can be useful, it has two major drawbacks: (1) the imported function could conflict with other built-in or imported function names, and (2) you lose the information about which module contains the imported function. Thus, you should only do this when you truly need to.
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
### Importing a submodule

Some modules have submodules that can also be imported without importing the entire module. We will see examples of this in later chapters in this book when making data plots using the `pyplot` submodule from the [Matplotlib module](http://matplotlib.org/) [^matplotlib]. In case you're already curious, here is an example.
<!-- #endregion -->

```python editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""}
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
```

```python editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""}
# Plot a simple x y line graph with the default plot settings
plt.plot([1, 2, 3, 4, 5], [5, 2, 3, 4, 1])
```

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
_**Figure 2.9**. Example plot using the Matplotlib module._

You can read more about the `plot` plotting function in the [Matplotlib pyplot documentation](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.plot.html) [^matplotdocs]. We will introduce Matplotlib in more detail in Chapter 4.
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
## Checking available functions and modules

As we saw above, the easiest way to use a module is to import it an then use its functions by typing `modulename.functionname()` and providing the necessary arguments. Yes, it is that simple.

However, there are times that you may not know the names of all of the functions in a module, or which are part of a given module. You can view the list of functions that are part of a module using the `dir()` function.

```python
In [1]: dir(math)
```

```
['__doc__',
 '__file__',
 '__loader__',
 '__name__',
 '__package__',
 '__spec__',
 'acos',
 'acosh',
... (output truncated)
```
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
In Jupyter notebooks you can also browse the available modules by typing in `modulename.` and then pressing the **tab** key:

![_**Figure 2.10**. Listing functions in the math module in JupyterLab._](../img/view_module_functions.png)

_**Figure 2.10**. Listing functions in the math module in JupyterLab._

This may be quite helpful, but what about when you don't know what a given function does? The easiest solution is to use the `help()` function (after importing the module). Let's have a look at the `help()` function output for the `math.sin()` function. Note that we do not include the parentheses for the target function when using the `help()` function.
<!-- #endregion -->

```python editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""}
help(math.sin)
```

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
Another possible issue is that you may not know which modules are available for use in your Python environment. In this case you can type `help("modules")` to see the complete list of installed Python packages. Be aware that although this works, the output can be a bit clumsy and hard to read. In addition, note that you may first see several warnings related to deprecated packages, etc. when running this command.

```python
In [13]: help("modules")
```

```code
Please wait a moment while I gather a list of all available modules...

(Some warning messages may appear here)

Cython              click               lib2to3             rioxarray
IPython             click_completion    libmambapy          rlcompleter
OpenSSL             click_log           libpysal            rtree
PIL                 click_plugins       linecache           runpy
__future__          cligj               linkify_it          rvlib
... (output truncated)
```
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
## Best practices for using modules

Finally, here are a few tips for using modules in your Python programs:

- Import modules at the start of your files. The [PEP 8](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/#imports) [^pep8] guidelines recommend always importing modules at the top of a script file (and the same can be applied to a Jupyter notebook.
- Avoid importing functions using wildcards. It is best not to import all functions from a module using the form `from X import *` (where `X` is a Python module) due to losing connections between the function and module it is sourced from.
- Choose logical names when renaming on import. It is preferable to use standard names (e.g., `import pandas as pd`) or select logical shorter names (e.g., `import matplotlib as mpl`) when renaming on import.
- Pay attention to possible name conflicts. When renaming imported modules or importing functions from modules, be careful that the names do not conflict with built-in Python functions (e.g., `import matplotlib as map` would conflict with the built-in Python function `map()`).

Additional examples of best practices for using modules can be found in {doc}`Appendix A.2 <back-matter/nb/appendix-1-best-practices>`.
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region editable=true slideshow={"slide_type": ""} -->
## Footnotes

[^builtin]: <https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html>
[^matplotdocs]: <https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.plot.html>
[^matplotlib]: <http://matplotlib.org/>
[^module]: <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html#modules>
[^package]: <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html#packages>
[^pep8]: <https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/#imports>
<!-- #endregion -->
